===== Press release · https://www.europarl.europa.eu/news/en/press-room/20260206IPR33903

Parliament approves €90 billion Ukraine support loan package | News | European Parliament

Dear visitor,
We use analytics cookies to offer you a better browsing experience. You have the choice to refuse or accept them.

I refuse analytics cookies I accept analytics cookies
For any information on the other cookies and server logs we use, we invite you to read our data protection policy , our cookies policy and our cookies inventory.

Launch the search

European Parliament

Parliament approves €90 billion Ukraine support loan package

Press Releases

Plenary session

AFET

BUDG

INTA

SEDE

11-02-2026 - 12:36

Share this page:

Facebook

X

LinkedIn

WhatsApp

€60 billion to strengthen Ukraine’s defence, €30 billion for macro-financial assistance and budget support

Ukraine must commit to continue democratic reforms and fight corruption

Loan to be financed through common EU borrowing, Ukraine to pay it back once it receives war reparations from Russia

MEPs voted in favour of three pieces of legislation to make a €90 billion EU loan available for Ukraine as it faces Russia’s continued war of aggression.

On Wednesday Parliament adopted a package of proposals aimed at supporting Ukraine with a €90 billion EU loan for 2026 and 2027. The so-called Ukraine support loan will help meet Ukraine’s urgent financing needs amid Russia’s ongoing war of aggression entering its fifth year.

Of the loan, €30 billion will be made available for macro-financial assistance or budget support, delivered through the EU’s Ukraine Facility. €60 billion will be allocated to strengthen Ukraine’s defence capabilities and support the procurement of military equipment, ensuring timely access to critical defence products from - in principle - Ukrainian, EU, and European Economic Area (EEA)/European Free Trade Association (EFTA) defence industries. If certain defence material is not immediately available from these countries for urgent delivery to Ukraine, a set of targeted derogations will apply to sourcing them from other countries.

Financial assistance will be provided in line with Ukraine’s financing needs, as set out in a financing strategy prepared by Ukraine and assessed by the Commission. The strategy will require approval by the Council.

All funding will be subject to strict conditions, including Ukraine’s continued commitment to democratic governance, the rule of law, and the protection of human rights, including the rights of minorities. This includes ongoing efforts to combat corruption and strengthen democratic institutions.

The support loan will be financed through common EU borrowing from capital markets and guaranteed by the “headroom” of the EU long-term budget, and debt-servicing costs will be covered by the EU’s annual budgets. The Commission has estimated the debt service costs at around €1 billion for 2027 and around €3 billion per year from 2028. Ukraine will be liable for the repayment of the principal of the loan once it receives war reparations from Russia.

The legislative acts needed to complete this support package were adopted under the Parliament’s urgent procedure to ensure the provision of rapid aid to Ukraine. The proposal on the Ukraine support loan was approved with 458 votes to 140 and 44 abstentions, the proposal to amend the Ukraine Facility received 473 votes to 140, and 32 abstentions, while the proposal to amend the 2021-2027 EU long-term budget (MFF) secured 490 votes to 130 and 32 abstentions.

Next steps

The Council also needs to formally adopt the package in order for the Commission to be able to disburse the first payment early in the second quarter of 2026.

Background

The EU support loan was agreed at the European Council in Brussels on 18 December 2025, and presented by the European Commission on 14 January 2026. The €90 billion is intended to cover two-thirds of Ukraine’s estimated financial needs for the period concerned. As Czechia, Hungary and Slovakia have opted out from backing the loan, the agreement was taken under the enhanced cooperation procedure , a mechanism that allows willing EU member states to collaborate in specific areas absent unanimity.

Contacts:

Viktor ALMQVIST

Press Officer

Contact data:

Phone number:

(+32) 2 28 31834 (BXL)

Mobile number:

(+32) 470 88 29 42

E-mail:

viktor.almqvist@europarl.europa.eu

E-mail:

foreign-press@europarl.europa.eu

X account:

@EP_Defence

Eszter ZALAN

Press Officer

Contact data:

Phone number:

+32 228 40081 (BXL) (BXL)

Mobile number:

+32 477 99 20 73

E-mail:

eszter.zalan@europarl.europa.eu

E-mail:

budg-press@europarl.europa.eu

X account:

@EP_Budgets

Further information

The adopted texts will be available here (11.02.2026)

Regulation implementing enhanced cooperation on the establishment of the Ukraine Support Loan for 2026 and 2027

Amending Regulation 2024/792 establishing the Ukraine Facility

Council regulation amending Regulation (EU, Euratom) 2020/2093 laying down the multiannual financial framework for the years 2021 to 2027

EPRS Briefing: EU support for Ukraine for 2026–2027

Recording of Budgets Committee meeting with Commissioner Serafin on the MFF amendment linked to the Ukraine Support Loan

Recording of joint meeting of the Committees on Security and Defence, Budgets, International Trade and Foreign Affairs on Commission’s presentation of the Ukraine loan package

Product information

Ref.:
20260206IPR33903

Share this page:

Facebook

X

LinkedIn

WhatsApp

Sign up for mail updates

PDF version

===== Summary · https://oeil.europarl.europa.eu/oeil/en/document-summary?id=1887786

Document summary | Legislative Observatory | European Parliament

tags -->

Dear visitor,
We use analytics cookies to offer you a better browsing experience. You have the choice to refuse or accept them.

I refuse analytics cookies I accept analytics cookies
For any information on the other cookies and server logs we use, we invite you to read our data protection policy , our cookies policy and our cookies inventory.

Implementing enhanced cooperation on the establishment of the Ukraine Support Loan for 2026 and 2027

2026/0008(COD)

11/02/2026

The European Parliament adopted by 458 votes to 140,
with 44 abstentions, a legislative resolution on the proposal for a
regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council
implementing enhanced cooperation on the establishment of the
Ukraine Support Loan for 2026 and 2027.

Parliament adopted its position in the first reading
under the urgent procedure .

Ukraine Support Loan

The regulation implements enhanced cooperation on the
establishment of an instrument for providing Union assistance to
Ukraine for 2026 and 2027 in the form of EUR 90 billion loan
to be repaid by reparations due by Russia.

The general objective of the Ukraine Support Loan is
to provide financial and economic assistance to Ukraine in a
predictable, continuous, orderly, flexible and timely manner with a
view to supporting Ukraine in covering its financing needs
resulting particularly from Russia’s war of aggression against
Ukraine and Russia’s non-payment of reparations
due.

The specific objectives of the Ukraine Support Loan
are as follows:

- to support macro-financial stability via the
easing of Ukraine’s external and internal financing
constraints; and

- to support Ukraine’s defence industrial
capacities through economic, financial and technical
cooperation.

Of the EUR 90 billion :

- EUR 30 billion will be allocated
to macro-financial assistance or budgetary support, through the
EU's Ukraine Facility;

- EUR 60 billion will be
allocated to strengthening Ukraine's defence capabilities and
supporting the procurement of military equipment, ensuring timely
access to critical defence products from - in principle -
Ukrainian, EU, and European Economic Area (EEA)/European Free Trade
Association (EFTA) defence industries. If certain defence material
is not immediately available from these countries for urgent
delivery to Ukraine, a set of targeted derogations will apply to
sourcing them from other countries.

Prerequisites for the granting of assistance
under the Ukraine Support Loan

The support to Ukraine under the Ukraine Support Loan
should be made available under the precondition that Ukraine
continues to uphold and respect effective democratic mechanisms,
including a multi-party parliamentary system and the rule of law,
and to guarantee respect for human rights, including those of
persons belonging to minorities. Upholding and respecting the rule
of law should include the fight against corruption.

Ukrainian financing strategy

The financial and economic assistance available under
the Ukraine Support Loan should be made accessible to Ukraine in
line with its financing needs. To that end, Ukraine should submit a
Ukrainian Financing Strategy on its financing needs and sources.
Following an assessment by the Commission, the Council will approve
this assessment and determine the amount of assistance to be made
available to Ukraine.

Assistance aimed at supporting Ukraine's defence
industrial capabilities

The purpose of this assistance is to enable Ukraine
to make urgent and major public investments in its
defence industry and its integration into the European defence
industry in response to and following the current crisis
situation.

That financial and economic assistance should
contribute, in particular, to the reconstruction, recovery and
modernisation of the Ukrainian Defence Technological and Industrial
Base, with a view to increasing its defence industrial readiness,
taking into account its gradual future integration into the
European Defence Technological and Industrial Base and through
support for the timely availability of defence products and other
products for defence purposes, through cooperation between the
Union and Ukraine.

Eligibility

Activities, expenditures and measures aimed at
supporting Ukraine's defence industrial capabilities related to
defence products and other products intended for defence purposes
will be eligible for assistance provided they meet certain
eligibility conditions.

The acquisition of defence products from manufacturers
established in third countries other than the EFTA States
that are members of the EEA and Ukraine will only take
place if there is no other solution available in the Union, in the
EFTA States that are members of the EEA and in Ukraine.

In this context, the Council, acting on a proposal
from the Commission, may adopt an implementing act to determine
that a third country other than the EFTA States that are members of
the EEA and Ukraine, which does not affect the security and defence
interests of the Union and its Member States and which has not
concluded an agreement with the Union, meets the following
cumulative conditions:

- the third country has undertaken to make a fair and
proportionate financial contribution to the costs arising from the
borrowing, corresponding to the value of the contracts awarded to
entities established in said third country;

- the third country has concluded a security and
defence partnership with the Union; and

- the third country provides significant financial and
military support to Ukraine.

Such a possibility, therefore, should be limited to
specific defence products taking into account the immediate
operational needs of Ukraine, focusing, in particular, on air and
missile defence systems, ammunition and missiles, drones and
related anti-drone systems, artillery systems, including deep
precision strike capabilities, strategic enablers such as, but not
limited to, strategic airlift, air-to-air refuelling, C4ISTAR
systems as well as space assets and services.

Text adopted by Parliament, 1st reading/single reading
